# Orthographic-Variation-of-Ladino-Vowels
Here are the data used for my sociolinguistic study on Ladino orthographic vowel alternations. This study was originally conducted as a class paper for the graduate seminar "Linguistic History of the Romance Language" at UC Berkeley. 

Abstract:
	The present study examines vowel alternations in modern written Ladino, a non-standardized and diasporic Ibero-Romance language spoken across North America and the Mediterranean. By comparing vowel usage of modern written Ladino in the newspaper El Amaneser איל אמאניסיר (Eng. “The Dawn”) to the online forum Ladinokomunita (Eng. “Ladinocommunity”), the study seeks to better understand which factors are associated with orthographic vowel selection patterns. Historically, written Ladino vowel alternation between   <e ~ i> and <o ~ u> has been difficult to analyze because it has been written using the Rashi or Meruba orthographies, which are derived from Hebrew orthographic conventions (Bunis 1975). Although Hebrew is typically considered an abjad with minimal orthographic vowel representation, Ladino texts tend to be slightly more alphabetic in nature. Nevertheless, Ladino text has tended to use only three graphemes (א י  ו) to describe five phonemic vowel qualities (/i/ /e/ /a/ /o/ /u/) (Bunis 1975). In the 20th and 21st centuries, the rise of Turkish and Latin-based Ladino alphabets have made phonological alternations between /e/~/i/ and /o/~/u/ more transparent (Kirschen 2023: 7). Moreover, El Amaneser and Ladinocomunita were established in 2005 and 1999, respectively, making these new domains of Ladino usage a somewhat recent innovation. Text from 47 archived volumes of El Amaneser was compiled into a corpus of 979,802 tokens through AntConc 4.2.4. To observe vowel alternation in Ladinokomunita, selected lexical tokens with vowel alternation will be analyzed across 59,302 posts. The vowel groups analyzed in the present study are split into two categories: Native Castilian Vowels (NCVs) <e, i, o, u>, and Turkish borrowed vowels (TBVs) <ı, ö, ü, i, e, u, o>. An NCV fixed-effects logistic regression will measure whether the vowel height (i, u, compared to e, o) differs depending on style (newspaper versus forum), underlying vowel frontness, word frequency, and the underlying vowel in prescriptive mainstream Spanish. For words of Turkish origin, a separate TBV fixed-effects logistic regression model will compare whether the selection of Turkish orthography <ı, ö, ü> or Castillian Orthography <i, e, u, o> differs depending on style, the underlying Turkish vowel, and word frequency. All statistical and graphical computing will be performed using the coding language R and the R packages car, emmeans, lmtest, pivottabler, and ggplot2 (R Core Team 2024, Fox & Weisberg 2019, Lenth 2024, Horthorn 2022, Bailiss 2023, Pedersen 2024). 
